.TH ZABBREV 1 "" "" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zabbrev \- select optimal text abbreviations for Z-machine story files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zabbrev
\fI[OPTIONS]\fR [\fIPATH\-TO\-GAME\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBzabbrev\fR utility analyzes text for repeated patterns and
suggests abbreviations that can reduce the size of Z-machine story data.
It reads \fB.zap\fR files produced by a ZIL compiler, or
\fBgametext.txt\fR from Inform6, or text extracted with txd/infodump.
When \fIPATH\-TO\-GAME\fR is omitted the program uses the current
directory.  If no \fB.zap\fR files or \fBgametext.txt\fR are found,
the usage message is shown and the program exits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a, \-A, \-\-alphabet
Create a tailor-made alphabet for this game and use it as basis for
the abbreviations (Z-machine version 5 and later only).
.TP
.B \-\-a0 \fISTRING\fR
Define 26 characters for alphabet A0.
.TP
.B \-\-a1 \fISTRING\fR
Define 26 characters for alphabet A1.
.TP
.B \-\-a2 \fISTRING\fR
Define 23 characters for alphabet A2.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-throwback
Throw all abbreviations that have lower score than last pick back on
the heap.  This only occasionally improves the result.
.TP
.B \-\-c0
Text character set is plain ASCII only.
.TP
.B \-\-cu
Text character set is UTF-8.
.TP
.B \-\-c1
Text character set is ISO 8859-1 (Latin1).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Print debug information.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show usage information and exit.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-inform
Generate Inform6-style output.  This requires that the file
\fBgametext.txt\fR is in the game path.  Implies \fB\-\-r3\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-infodump \fIFILE\fR
Use text extracted from a compiled file with Infodump.  Always used in
conjunction with the \fB\-\-txd\fR switch.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-number \fINUM\fR
Number of abbreviations to generate (default 96).
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output \fIFORMAT\fR
Select output format.  \fIFORMAT\fR may be \fB0\fR or \fBinput\fR (default),
\fB1\fR or \fBinform\fR, or \fB2\fR or \fBzap\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-onlyrefactor
Skip calculation of abbreviations and only print information about
duplicate long strings.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Do not print the startup banner or progress output.
.TP
.B \-\-r3
Force rounding to 3 for fast and deep rounding.  Normally rounding
to 6 is used for strings stored in high memory for Z-machine version 4
and later.
.TP
.B \-\-txd \fIFILE\fR
Use text extracted from a compiled file with txd.  Always used in
conjunction with the \fB\-\-infodump\fR switch.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Print extra information.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display the program version and exit.
.TP
.B \-x \fILEVEL\fR
Set compression level (0\-3, default 2).
.TP
.B \-x0
Fastest compression.  Pick abbreviations according to highest score
with R.A.\& Wagner's optimal parse method.
.TP
.B \-x1
Fast compression.  x0 plus adding and removing initial and trailing
characters for better Z-character rounding.
.TP
.B \-x2 [\fIn\fR]
Normal compression (default).  x1 plus testing up to \fIn\fR
(default 10\|000) discarded abbreviation variants for better
Z-character rounding.
.TP
.B \-x3 [\fIn1\fR] [\fIn2\fR]
Maximum compression.  x2 plus testing \fIn2\fR (default 1\|000)
discarded abbreviations as all possible replacements for better
Z-character rounding.
.PP
Z-machine version options: \fB\-v1\fR through \fB\-v8\fR
.RS 4
v1\-v3: Round to 3 for high strings
.br
v4\-v7: Round to 6 for high strings
.br
v8: Round to 12 for high strings
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Texinfo manual \fIzabbrev.texi\fR contains complete documentation.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to: <https://github.com/36bit/zabbrev/issues>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025, 2026 Jason Self <j@jxself.org>
Licensed under the GNU GPL version 3 or later.
