\input texinfo
@c -*- texinfo -*-
@setfilename zabbrev.info
@settitle zabbrev Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include version.texi

@copying
This manual is part of @command{zabbrev}.
Copyright @copyright{} 2025, 2026 Jason Self

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``Copying''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title zabbrev Manual
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@page
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top zabbrev Manual
@end ifnottex

This document describes the @command{zabbrev} program which selects
optimal text abbreviations for Z-machine story files.

@menu
* Overview::
* Invoking zabbrev::
* Copying::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@command{zabbrev} analyzes text for repeated patterns and suggests
abbreviations that reduce the size of Z-machine story data.  The input
is a directory of @file{.zap} files produced by a ZIL compiler, or an
Inform6 @file{gametext.txt} file, or text extracted using txd and
infodump.  The program outputs a list of abbreviations and reports the
resulting storage savings.

@node Invoking zabbrev
@chapter Invoking zabbrev

The general syntax is:
@example
zabbrev [@var{options}] [@var{path-to-game}]
@end example

When @var{path-to-game} is omitted the program uses the current
directory.  If neither @file{gametext.txt} nor any @file{*.zap} files
are present, the usage message is displayed and the program exits.
The following options are available:

@table @option
@item -a, -A, --alphabet
Create a tailor-made alphabet for this game and use it as basis for
the abbreviations (Z-machine version 5 and later only).

@item --a0 @var{str}
Define 26 characters for alphabet A0.

@item --a1 @var{str}
Define 26 characters for alphabet A1.

@item --a2 @var{str}
Define 23 characters for alphabet A2.

@item -b, --throwback
Throw all abbreviations that have lower score than last pick back on
the heap.  This only occasionally improves the result.

@item --c0
Text character set is plain ASCII only.

@item --cu
Text character set is UTF-8.

@item --c1
Text character set is ISO 8859-1 (Latin1).

@item --debug
Print debug information.

@item -h, --help
Show usage information and exit.

@item -i, --inform
Generate Inform6-style output.  This requires that the file
@file{gametext.txt} is in the game path.  Implies @option{--r3}.

@item --infodump @var{file}
Use text extracted from a compiled file with Infodump.  Always used in
conjunction with the @option{--txd} switch.

@item -n, --number @var{num}
Number of abbreviations to generate.  The default is @code{96}.

@item -o, --output @var{fmt}
Select output format.  @var{fmt} may be @code{0} or @code{input}
(default), @code{1} or @code{inform}, or @code{2} or @code{zap}.

@item --onlyrefactor
Skip calculation of abbreviations and only print information about
duplicate long strings.

@item -q, --quiet, --silent
Do not print the startup banner or progress output.

@item --r3
Force rounding to 3 for fast and deep rounding.  Normally rounding
to 6 is used for strings stored in high memory for Z-machine version 4
and later.

@item --txd @var{file}
Use text extracted from a compiled file with txd.  Always used in
conjunction with the @option{--infodump} switch.

@item -v, --verbose
Print extra information.

@item --version
Display the program version and exit.

@item -x0
Fastest compression.  Pick abbreviations according to highest score
with R.A.@: Wagner's optimal parse method.

@item -x1
Fast compression.  x0 plus adding and removing initial and trailing
characters for better Z-character rounding.

@item -x2 [@var{n}]
Normal compression (default).  x1 plus testing up to @var{n}
(default 10,000) discarded abbreviation variants for better
Z-character rounding.

@item -x3 [@var{n1}] [@var{n2}]
Maximum compression.  x2 plus testing @var{n2} (default 1,000)
discarded abbreviations as all possible replacements for better
Z-character rounding.
@end table

Z-machine version options: @option{-v1} through @option{-v8}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
v1--v3: Round to 3 for high strings
@item
v4--v7: Round to 6 for high strings
@item
v8: Round to 12 for high strings
@end itemize

@node Copying
@appendix Copying

@verbatiminclude ../COPYING

@bye
